# Organisational Structures, Mental Health, and Policing: A Wee Chat with Dr. Dr. Mahnoz Illias

> Dr. Dr. Mahnoz Illias completed her PhD at the University of Glasgow in 2025.
> Yes, she is a double doctor 😎, originally gaining a medical degree in
> Bangladesh, before completing a MSc in Global Mental Health, supported by the
> Commonwealth Scholarship Commission. Her PhD research focused on the female
> police officers in the UK, examining how organisational structures and culture
> impact their health and well-being. We had a wee chat with her about her work.

**Awright Dr Dr Mahnoz?**

Hello there Dr Perry Josef Gee Gibson.

**What was your research topic about?**

I looked at the gender toll of policing on the health and well-being of female
police officers in the UK.

**Who were you working with for that?**

I was working with my supervisors and the wider team that I engaged with. My
primary supervisor was based at the School of Health and Wellbeing and my second
supervisor was at the Adam Smith Business School.

It was quite an interdisciplinary project. I was based within these two schools,
but a lot of the work I did was actually closer to the field of criminology
rather than either public health or business.

Outside of the school, I worked closely with the Scottish Women's Development
Forum of Police Scotland. They're a group who represent women within Police
Scotland - all the women staff and officers. This is a voluntary organisation
because all the organisations keep saying that "they're trying their best to
accommodate the welfare of their employees", but according to them, "they do not
have the funds". So there are some people who are stepping forward to make
things work. This platform was one of those organisations who came forward to
volunteer to help the women within policing in Scotland.

Other than them, there were some broader groups like the Scottish Institute for
Policing Research and also the Academic Team of Police Scotland.

**What was the connection with the Adam Smith Business School; I don't
immediately see the connection to the research area?**

It was mainly about the organisation - the organisational culture, structure,
and norms, and how they impact health and well-being. Though in public health we
do study this (and public health itself is very interdisciplinary), it's mainly
the people in "organisation studies" who study how organisations are
functioning. They're located at the business school, so that's where the Adam
Smith Business School comes in.

**You were originally a medical doctor, then you did a master's in global mental
health. How was that perspective different—looking at mental health not just as
an individual matter, but as a large-scale policy question?**

It was different. When we talk about health or mental health, what I've found is
that people often think it has to be related to medicine itself, or hospitals,
or doctors dealing with it. But in our day-to-day life, we can see how each
individual has a health experience that is much less formal. Our eating choices,
our social interactions, our work environment—all of these impact our health.

We also share a lot of experience from the people around us, which impacts us
both mentally and physically. To acknowledge that in the organisational space or
in the workplace - sometimes in the past it used to be presented as an
individual problem, an individual issue. But I believe we're coming to recognise
it as a shared responsibility. Though every interaction—for example, me
interacting with you—isn't happening in an individual or isolated space, both of
us are bringing part of our shared knowledge even into this conversation.

I also feel that when we talk about health, we normally try to narrow it down to
medical reports or such things, but there is something way beyond that. Health
is not just a medical issue—it's a social issue, it's a _justice_ issue. These
things came up again and again in my research.

**So getting that perspective that not everything can and should be
medicalised?**

Yes, when I finished my medical school, my idea about mental health was quite
narrow. When I used to talk about mental health, I used to think it had to be
something major—schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, or something that needs regular
medication and to be dealt with on a regular basis.

Outside of that, our understanding was just that depression is there. But the
idea that mental health is not something separate—it's happening at the same
time that we are dealing with our physical health—it's just intertwined with who
we are. It's not a separate entity.

**Was your research throughout Scotland or the UK?**

It was actually throughout the UK. Because the project received half of its
funding from the Scottish Institute for Policing Research, I had more connection
with organisations based in Scotland. But I did a mixed-method study. I had to
analyse two large national cohorts of police officers, which covered information
from all police officers and staff across the UK—it wasn't confined to Scotland,
and I did not confine my results to Scotland either.

When I did my primary data collection, most of the participants were from
Scotland—probably two-thirds—and the rest were from England and Wales.

**In brief, what were the main findings of your thesis?**

I would say the main findings were that the health and well-being of female
police officers cannot be understood as a single piece of work. Rather, I would
describe it as a puzzle. By doing all these different parts, I got a closer
picture of the entire puzzle, but it's still not solved. It was more like a
mosaic, with pieces filling into each other rather than isolated factors—the
social aspect of health working one way, the mental health aspect another way,
the physical aspect there. They're all intertwined.

Another thing I found was that all of these issues—the culture or the structural
issues—often, as I said earlier, we try to describe them as medical problems.
But health is not just a medical problem. It is a justice issue as well. What
facilities you're getting within your organisation, what you're given or not
given, can be seen from a justice point of view. At the root of everything,
there is actually organisational injustice, which is controlling how it impacts
overall health.

Lastly, I found that social support, especially workplace social support, plays
a huge role in our lives, which we often overlook.

**It seems these are very interconnected, complex problems. One can't just say
one thing is solely responsible. Nevertheless, would you say the experience
people have as women was a significant contributor, compared to just "being a
polis[^1] is stressful"? How much can be seen through a gendered lens?**

Every organisation or institution within a society, including families, is a
reflection of the existing society itself. When I was talking to those police
officers, one of my inclusion criteria was they would need to have at least ten
years of experience working as a police officer—to reflect back on how the
culture changed over time, how policies changed, how that impacted them.

All of them came into policing knowing there would be a certain level of
operational stress. They knew what policing was—definitely there were some
surprises like every other job, but gradually in day-to-day life, the relational
aspects became more prominent.

There's a scholar with a famous theory called "Gendered Organisations"—her name
is Joan Acker. She explains it very nicely. She says that a "job" itself is an
abstract idea; for its embodiment, you need a _person_ to be there.

And that person, when they enter the role, they bring all of their gendered
ideas about women with them—what they learned throughout their life about the
limitations of women, what they can do, what they cannot do. They came with
their perceptions and kept spreading those ideas. But as society has changed,
those ideas have also changed. But still now, though we keep saying that men and
women are equal in our society, that's not quite the case.

**Is it your impression that police in the UK have more of a "boys' club"
problem than other places? Or is it more in-line with the issues in wider
society?**

Definitely they had their own boys' club issues. They had cultures where women
wouldn't be invited to the informal parties or after-work gatherings, or they'd
always assume that if you have children, you must need childcare...

**Are there any articles folk could check out if they were interested?**

I have two articles out so far, and two others are under review.

My meta-ethnographic review, which looked at the interplay between
organisational injustice and the health and well-being of female police officers
and staff across the globe, and published in BMC Public Health [1].

Another piece of work compared the impact of workplace social support on the
mental health of parents, both men and women, publishing in the journal
"Policing" [2].

[1] M. Illias, K. Riach, and E. Demou, 'Understanding the interplay between
organisational injustice and the health and wellbeing of female police officers:
a meta-ethnography', BMC Public Health, vol. 24, Sep. 2024, doi:
[10.1186/s12889-024-20152-1](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39342226/).

[2] M. Illias et al., ‘Exploring gender differences in policing: the role of
workplace social support on the mental health and wellbeing of parents in
policing’, Policing, vol. 19, Jan. 2025, doi:
[10.1093/police/paaf037](https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/doi/10.1093/police/paaf037/8316114?login=false).

**Were there any technical tools in your work that you were using, and any
frustrations with them?**

Definitely. One of the datasets I was using was the Airwave Health Monitoring
Study. To access that data, I had to get access to a safe haven, or what they
formally call a Trusted Research Environment. They had their maintenance
windows, and sometimes because it's a big dataset hosted somewhere else, there
were maintenance issues. A lot of days I was very frustrated because you're in
the mood to analyse and then you cannot access the data.

When I began my PhD, I didn't know how to code in R, but I needed to for its
flexibility. Learning that was also a challenge. I used to get frozen just by
the thought of having to engage in coding work—the word "coding" was very
frightening. But after my analysis of the first database, I got quite confident,
and it didn't take me much time to do my second analysis.

**Do you think you would have benefited from having access to more technical
support?**

I had people in my unit who I could reach out to, but in a PhD you can't control
which part of work you're going to do at what time of day. If it was a friend, I
could reach out anytime. But if it's a colleague, it's a formal relation. As a
new person within the unit, I was also hesitant to reach out to them. Whenever I
felt issues, I could reach out to people, but these were colleagues who had
volunteered to help me—there weren't any designated people you could always go
to. Having someone like that would have definitely benefited me or people like
me who have just started coding.

**What was your experience navigating the research space in the UK as a
Bangladeshi woman?**

I didn't face any issues particularly from a gender perspective. But compared to
my MSc, I felt a bit isolated. I don't know whether that was the nature of the
PhD, or something was wrong with me, or I wasn't ready—it was just after COVID
as well, so people were quite isolated at that time. Maybe all those factors
worked together.

I was still hanging out with my old friends outside that space, but compared to
that, I did not have that many close friends within my own department. They were
very lovely people, very cooperative, but somehow I didn't have that connection
with them.

But there was another space—the Scottish Institute for Policing Research—where I
met a lot of people from different fields: criminology, cybersecurity, forensic
backgrounds. I made good friends with them. I don't know what the reason was
behind this, but that's how it was.

**For any organisation in general—you've looked a lot into organisational
structures. Is there any general advice you'd give to leaders or individuals
about how to help manage the issues you've seen in your work?**

One of the things was—Police Scotland is a single force, but in England they
have around 43 forces. Across different stations or forces, they were tackling
different issues very nicely. But those were ad hoc initiatives that weren't
being shared with each other.

I know there's decentralisation of policing and those ideas in criminology, and
there are certain reasons for that. But I felt they should have a common
platform where they can share positive initiatives that are actually helping
people deal with the issues they face in their day-to-day life.

If they can find a way to share those and adopt the effective programmes that
are working for people, that would be really beneficial for the entire
organisation or the entire police force across the UK.

**You mentioned the PhD ended up being more about criminology. Could you briefly
explain what you meant by that?**

I would say it's criminology because every time I was going to conferences and
knowledge exchange programmes, I was mostly interacting with people from
criminology backgrounds or forensic psychology—those kinds of backgrounds.
They're the ones coming to work on what's happening with policing, how policing
can be better, rather than someone from a health background.

In that sense, I didn't have much in common with other people in terms of
background. But they were very welcoming, so it wasn't an issue.

Also, a major portion of writing up my final thesis involved understanding the
policing structure within the UK—what policies are out there, under what law
police organisations in the UK came into being. Those are things more from
criminology rather than my health perspective. They were new ideas for me.

**Anything else you want to highlight?**

Another interesting finding: when I started my project, I was initially
expecting the focus to be about physical health. Many police officers are
exposed to more danger than a typical office job, and if we're talking about
women—our physiology is generally different from men, and this has some impact
on our bones and everything. Perhaps my research would take me into questions
around musculoskeletal problems they're facing, and how the workplace could
change to support that.

However, when I started to look into it, what came up more consistently was
_mental health_ issues. I was very surprised that no matter which part of the
world the articles I was researching were coming from, they had similar issues:
regardless of the culture—whether it was from the Global South or Global North.
It was surprising for me because, coming from Bangladesh, I expected the UK to
be a "utopia" where everything was perfect, or at least significantly better,
women would be getting their rights properly, they didn't have to fight for it,
they were living their lives very comfortably.

But when I looked beyond the surface, it was very shocking and frustrating for
me to deal with those accounts on a daily basis, and that these issues exist in
the UK as much as they do in other parts of the world.

[^1]: "Polis" is a Scots term for police.
